# Articles à lire pour la V2 de l'Univers et Nous

- [The end of us](https://aeon.co/essays/to-imagine-our-own-extinction-is-to-be-able-to-answer-for-it?utm_source=Instagram&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=tile) - Mooynihan (2020)
> In the 1930s, the American historian of ideas Arthur Lovejoy noticed an assumption, which he called the ‘Principle of Plenitude’, spanning Western philosophy from Aristotle to G W Leibniz. Put simply, the Principle holds that all legitimate possibilities must eventually be realised. Formulated slightly differently, there are no unjustifiable absences in existence. There are no things that could be, but simply just are not, without any justification. Accordingly, something as unjustifiable as an extinction (inasmuch as it is an unaccountable gap in nature’s space of realisations) was forbidden. This effectively made the extirpation of any species (whether human or nonhuman) meaningless and temporary, because it entails that the possibility of it returning will, inevitably and eventually, be fulfilled. Even if it is wiped out somewhere, each species will someday re-emerge. 
> in 1686, the French scientist Bernard Le Bouyer de Fontenelle proclaimed with identical conviction that no species ‘can totally perish’ because, even if our planet is destroyed or our Sun dies, a new world will eventually be repopulated somewhere with the exact same species. 
- [Until Recently, People Accepted the ‘Fact’ of Aliens in the Solar System](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/until-recently-people-accepted-the-fact-of-aliens-in-the-solar-system/) - Scientific American (2021)
>  how much our philosophical mood has changed back and forth across the centuries.
>  In western Europe, during the period from some four hundred years ago until last century, the question of life beyond the Earth seems to have been less of ‘if’ and more of ‘what’. Famous scientists like Christiaan Huygens wrote in his Cosmotheoros of “So many Suns, so many Earths, and every one of them stock’d with so many Herbs, Trees and Animals…even the little Gentlemen round Jupiter and Saturn…” 
>  In other words, in many quarters there was no “are we alone?” question being asked, instead the debate was already onto the details of how the life elsewhere in the cosmos went about its business. In the 1700s and 1800s we had astronomers like William Herschel, or the more amateur Thomas Dick, not only proposing that our solar system, from the Moon to the outer planets, was overrun with lifeforms (Dick holding the record by suggesting that Saturn’s rings held around 8 trillion individuals) but convincing themselves that they could see the evidence. Herschel, with his good telescopes, becoming convinced that there were forests on the Moon, in the Mare humorum, and speculating that the Sun’s dark spots were actually holes in a glowing hot atmosphere, beneath which, a cool surface supported large alien beings.
>  the key point is that we have actually more often than not been of a mindset that life is out there, and could explain certain cosmic observations. The problem has been that, as data has improved, and scrutiny has intensified, the presence of life has not revealed itself – from planetary exploration or from the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. And because of that we’ve swung to the other extreme, where the question has gone from "what" all the way back to “if.”
- [The Extraterrestrial Life Debate 1750-1900](https://books.google.fr/books?id=Ygc5AAAAIAAJ&pg=PA517&lpg=PA517&dq=19th+century+contest+first+to+detect+aliens+mars&source=bl&ots=i-l1H2c4Bn&sig=ACfU3U2gL1_8rLE2_NgyYLKe0BLdY9ZrDw&hl=fr&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiViMuW2_jxAhX2CWMBHcBeBJQQ6AEwB3oECAYQAw#v=onepage&q=19th%20century%20contest%20first%20to%20detect%20aliens%20mars&f=false) -  Michael J. Crowe (1988)
- [A brief history of the extraterrestrial intelligence concept](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/full/1981QJRAS..22..133T) - Tipler (1981)
> le mot "monde" /univers signifiait quelque chose de différent chez les grecs. Univers ptolémaique. La pluralité des mondes dans ce sens signifiait une pluralité d'univers ptolémaiques auto-contenus, avec une Terre centrale habitée.
> les arguments en faveur d'un univers habité reposaient sur l'idée d'un univers infini et sur le principe de plénitude : l'univers contient toutes les formes possibles d'existence.
> Le monde clos et fini d'Aristote ne laissait aucune place à la possibilité d'autres planètes habitées.
> La question de la pluralité des monde (au sens des grecs) était parfois discutée au moyen âge, mais elle était rejetée par la majorité des penseurs chrétiens de l'époque selon des arguments d'ordre théologiques. Dans la doctrine chrétienne, un univers créé pour les humains et où le Christ était né une fois sur Terre ne pouvait pas abriter d'autres êtres intelligents. Il faudrait pour cela un autre Seigneur, ce qui contredirait l'idée d'un Christ unique.
> Thomas d'Aquin rejette le principe de plénitude et la pluralité des mondes. Cela impliquerait soit l'existence d'un grand nombre de copies de notre monde, ce qui serait vain, soit l'existence d'autres mondes imparfaits, ce qui serait pas compatible avec l'idée d'un créateur parfait.
> C'est avec le mystique Giordano Bruno que la pluralité des mondes prend son sens moderne. Prêche les idées de copernic et l'idée d'une infinité de mondes habités. Mais Bruno était un mystique, pas un scientifique. 
> Avec l'invention de la lunette, du télescope, et la révolution Copernicienne, Les étoiles sont d'autres Soleils. (quand on découvre ça?) Les planètes sont d'autres mondes comme la Terre. le principe de plénitude regagne du terrain dans les imaginaires, et sert à justifier l'existence d'autres êtres ailleurs dans l'univers : les planètes et les étoiles ont bien été créées dans un but! 
> 1686, Bernard de Fontenelle "entretien sur la pluralité des mondes" bests seller. Il fait mention de voyage spatial : "L'art de voler ne fait encore que de naître, il se perfectionnera, et quelque jour on ira jusqu'à la Lune."
> La phrase de Fontenelle sera prophétique. Mais devra attendre le milieu du 20e siècle.
> Au 18e e au 19e siècle, l'idée que l'univers est rempli de créatures fait l'unanimité, basé sur le principe de plénitude. Mais pas sur des bases empiriques !
> Il faudra attendre 1995 (!) pour que les premières preuves observationnelles de l'existence d'autres systèmes planétaires.
> L'invention de la radio a convaincu certains scientifiques que l'on pourrait communiquer à des distances interstellaires à l'aide de messages en ondes radio.
- [The long-term quest to build a 'galactic civilisation'](https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20210721-the-quest-for-a-galactic-civilisation-that-saves-humanity) - BBC Future
> Until the late 1800s and early 20th Century, scholars "felt the Universe was full of value and humanoids", says Thomas Moynihan, who studies intellectual history at the University of Oxford. As he wrote recently, if people imagined other worlds, they pictured other civilisations living there, rather than barren planets within a bleak, empty vacuum. The idea that the cosmos is almost certainly predominantly empty – a vast region that we could expand into – is therefore a relatively recent realisation in human history, says Moynihan. 
- [Scientific Realism](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/scientific-realism/) - Stanford Ecyclopaedia of philosophy
- [What is a particle ?](https://www.quantamagazine.org/what-is-a-particle-20201112/) - Quanta Magazine
- [Interview du planétologue William Hartmann : « La thèse du grand bombardement tardif s’effondre »](https://www.cieletespace.fr/actualites/interview-du-planetologue-william-hartmann-la-these-du-grand-bombardement-tardif-s-effondre) - Ciel & Espace
> La Terre s’est formée il y a 4,5 milliards d’années (4,5 Ga). Selon le scénario du grand bombardement tardif, notre planète aurait subi une faible quantité d’impacts de météorites pendant les 500 millions d’années qui ont suivi. Puis, après cette période de calme, la quantité d’astéroïdes et de comètes croisant notre route aurait subitement augmenté, résultant en un bombardement intense pendant à peine 170 millions d’années. Puis cette activité aurait de nouveau chuté. Représentez la courbe du nombre d’impacts au cours du temps, et vous obtenez un pic. Un épisode bref et intense qu’a également connu notre voisine, la Lune. Les grands bassins d’impact visibles à sa surface sont souvent associés à ce grand bombardement tardif.
- [A diatribe on expanding space](https://arxiv.org/abs/0809.4573) - Peacock (2008)
- [Expanding space: the Root of all Evil?](https://arxiv.org/abs/0707.0380) - Francis et al (2007)
- [The Sun Will Turn Into a Giant Crystal Ball After It Dies](https://www.space.com/42949-sun-crystal-white-dwarf-stars-lifecycle.html) - Space (2019)
> Half a century ago, theorists predicted that white dwarfs solidify into crystal over time — and the new research has found that this is indeed the case
> "The sun itself will become a crystal white dwarf in about 10 billion years."
> "This is the first direct evidence that white dwarfs crystallize, or transition from liquid to solid," Tremblay said. "It was predicted 50 years ago that we should observe a pileup in the number of white dwarfs at certain luminosities and colors due to crystallization, and only now this has been observed."
White-dwarf crystallization is akin to water freezing from liquid to ice. But the material in this case is oxygen and carbon, and it's crystallizing at temperatures that aren't exactly chilly. The process really kicks into gear when a white-dwarf interior cools down to about 18 million degrees Fahrenheit (10 million degrees Celsius), the researchers said.
The result is likely a core composed of crystallized oxygen and a mantle dominated by carbon.
- [Core crystallization and pile-up in the cooling sequence of evolving white dwarfs](https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.00370) - Tremblay et al (2019)
> ok
- [Particles do not exist](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1984qtg..book...66D/abstract) - Paul Davies
- [In Search for a Planet Better than Earth: Top Contenders for a Superhabitable World](https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/ast.2019.2161) - Schulze-Makuch et al (2020)
>  we can distill a short list of 24 top contenders among the >4000 exoplanets known today that could be candidates for a superhabitable planet. In fact, we argue that, with regard to the search for extrasolar life, potentially superhabitable planets may deserve higher priority for follow-up observations than most Earth-like planets. 
>  there are indeed at least about two dozen possible candidates for a superhabitable planet. We caution that we do not have any observational signatures of life from any of these planets. In fact, only Kepler 1126 b (KOI 2162) and Kepler-69c (KOI 172.02) are statistically validated planets (Morton et al., 2016). The other objects are unconfirmed Kepler Objects of Interest (KOIs), some of which may turn out to be astrophysical false positives. Even Kepler-69c, whose planetary status has been statistically established, will likely not be the target of future follow-up observations with the James Webb Space Telescope or its successor, potentially LUVIOR. At a distance of almost 2000 light years, it is simply too far away.
>  One obvious parameter missing from Table 3 is the planetary mass. This lack of knowledge is inherent to most of the planets and candidates detected with the Kepler mission, which used the transit method. The transit method gives information about the radius of the planet relative to the stellar radius, but in most cases mass measurements required additional stellar spectroscopy follow-up observations to measure the radial velocity signature. Nevertheless, we highlight in Table 3 two planets with upper radius limit <1.6 that have a good potential of being rocky rather than gaseous planets 
>  As an interesting side note, we point out that superhabitable worlds are expected to be larger and more massive than Earth-sized, Earth-mass planets, and by virtue of the observational biases of the RV and transits methods, superhabitable planets should be easier to detect than Earth-like planets.
>  Some of the astrophysical conditions that we identify as crucial for a planet (or moon) to be potentially superhabitable are far from being observationally testable on planets outside the solar system. 
>  Although none of these planets and planet candidates is closer than 100 light years (Table 3) and, therefore, inaccessible for high-quality observations from NASA's TESS mission, we argue that superhabitable planets might well be present in the exoplanet sample known today. Should such a planet be discovered within about 100 light years in the near future, then such a world would deserve higher priority for follow-up observations in search of extrasolar life than the most Earth-like planets.
- [The Origin of Elements from Carbon to Uranium](https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.04660) - Kobayashi et al (2020)
> Elements heavier than helium are synthesized
inside and then ejected by dying stars. The next generation
of stars form from gas clouds that include heavy elements
from the previous stellar generations. Therefore, stars in the
present-day galaxy are fossils that retain the information on
the properties of stars from the past. From the elemental
abundances of the present-day stars, it is possible to disen-
tangle the star formation history of the host galaxy.
H and most of He are produced in Big Bang nucle-
osynthesis. The small green and blue areas also in-
cludes the amounts returned to the ISM via stellar mass
loss and some He newly synthesized in stars.
49% of C, 51% of F, and 74% of N are produced by
AGB stars
α elements (O, Ne, Mg, Si, S, Ar, and Ca) are mainly
produced by core-collapse supernovae, but 22% of Si,
29% of S, 34% of Ar, and 39% of Ca are come from
SNe Ia. 
A large fraction of Cr, Mn, Fe, and Ni are produced by
SNe Ia. In classical works, most of Fe was thought to
be produced by SNe Ia, but the fraction is only 60%
in our model, and the rest is mainly produced by HNe.
Among neutron-capture elements, as predicted from
nucleosynthesis yields, AGB stars are the main enrich-
ment source for the s-process elements at the second
(Ba) and third (Pb) peaks
For the heavier neutron-capture elements contributions
from both NS-NS/NS-BH mergers and MRSNe are
necessary

- [Bashing holes in the tale of Earth's troubled youth](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-01074-6) - Nature (2018)
> the Late Heavy Bombardment (LHB), has been an integral part of Earth’s origin story for decades, ever since geologists did a systematic study of samples brought back from the Moon by NASA Apollo missions. But now, the once-popular theory has come under attack, and mounting evidence is causing many researchers to abandon it. A growing community of planetary scientists thinks that things quietened down relatively quickly, with a steadily decreasing rain of asteroids that ended a few hundred million years after Earth and the Moon formed. The first really new data arrived in 2000. Planetary scientist David Kring, cosmochemist Timothy Swindle and planetary scientist Barbara Cohen, all then at the University of Arizona in Tucson, collected lunar meteorites that had fallen to Earth after being blasted from the Moon’s surface by asteroid strikes. They hoped such rocks would provide a more random sample of the Moon’s crust than those from Apollo, which represent at most 4% of the lunar surface. But when the results came back, they showed a curious, and familiar, pattern.
- [Searching high and low for the origins of life](https://knowablemagazine.org/article/physical-world/2020/searching-high-and-low-origins-life) - Knowable Magazine (2020)
> recent studies have shown that two essential ingredients — amino acids and primitive cell membranes — can form spontaneously and reliably near the hydrothermal vents found in seafloors.
> astrobiologist Laurie Barge and her colleagues showed how amino acids, the building blocks of proteins, could have formed near alkaline vents. 
> To learn whether life’s building blocks could have formed near ancient vents, Barge’s team created miniature vents in the laboratory. 
> Within these simulated vents, the chemical conditions allowed electrons to flow between the iron minerals and pyruvate, yielding the amino acid alanine
>  In the second experiment, biochemist Nick Lane at University College London and his colleagues showed how primitive membranes could form near alkaline vents.
>  Lane used a laboratory replica of ancient deep-sea conditions to determine whether lipid-surrounded bubbles called vesicles — a sort of protocell — could form there. His team added 14 fatty acids and other chemicals, which would likely have been present in the early ocean, to acidic, simulated seawater. The scientists adjusted the liquid to be alkaline, making the chemicals go into solution. When the researchers slowly mixed the solution with seawater, the fatty acids assembled into vesicles. Vesicles formed most readily in conditions strikingly like white smokers — at 158 degrees F with strong alkalinity,
>  Some scientists aren’t convinced that life originated at a deep, alkaline hydrothermal vent. David Deamer, a biophysicist at the University of California, Santa Cruz, is one of several who say that salty ocean water would destroy the fatty acids needed to create cell membranes. He has shown that vesicles can form in freshwater — no deep-sea vents needed — by wetting and drying fatty acids. 
>  Imagine a freshwater hot spring, where the surrounding ground gets damp after a rain and then periodically dries out. As things dry up, the compounds dissolved in the water become more concentrated. When drying removes water molecules, energy is released, creating the bonds that allow complex organic molecules to form.
>  Both research camps have struggled to show that the basic biological molecules they make in the lab would actually function inside living organisms. Still, the hydrothermal vent proponents say they have all the right ingredients — including the energy needed to kickstart life. White smokers can supply energy in two ways, and one or both could have provided the power needed to build complex organic molecules.
>  Whether life originated in the deep ocean or shallow terrestrial pools remains to be seen. But it now seems likely that crucial organic molecules, and the membranes to hold them, could have been generated using the geochemistry of early Earth.
- [How the first life on Earth survived its biggest threat - water](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-03461-4) - Nature (2020)
> Although many scientists have long speculated that those pioneering cells arose in the ocean, recent research suggests that the key molecules of life, and its core processes, can form only in places such as Jezero — a relatively shallow body of water fed by streams. That’s because several studies suggest that the basic chemicals of life require ultraviolet radiation from sunlight to form, and that the watery environment had to become highly concentrated or even dry out completely at times. In laboratory experiments, Sutherland and other scientists have produced DNA, proteins and other core components of cells by gently heating simple carbon-based chemicals, subjecting them to UV radiation and intermittently drying them out. Chemists have not yet been able to synthesize such a wide range of biological molecules in conditions that mimic seawater. The emerging evidence has caused many researchers to abandon the idea that life emerged in the oceans and instead focus on land environments, in places that were alternately wet and dry. The shift is hardly unanimous, but scientists who support the idea of a terrestrial beginning say it offers a solution to a long-recognized paradox: that although water is essential for life, it is also destructive to life’s core components. When laboratory research into life’s origins started in earnest in the 1950s, many researchers assumed that life began in the sea, with a rich mix of carbon-based chemicals dubbed the primordial soup. This idea was independently proposed in the 1920s by biochemist Alexander Oparin, in what was then the Soviet Union, and geneticist J. B. S. Haldane in the United Kingdom. But many scientists today say there’s a fundamental problem with that idea: life’s cornerstone molecules break down in water. This is because proteins, and nucleic acids such as DNA and RNA, are vulnerable at their joints. Proteins are made of chains of amino acids, and nucleic acids are chains of nucleotides. If the chains are placed in water, it attacks the links and eventually breaks them. In carbon chemistry, “water is an enemy to be excluded as rigorously as possible”, wrote the late biochemist Robert Shapiro in his totemic 1986 book Origins, which critiqued the primordial ocean hypothesis2. This is the water paradox. Today, cells solve it by limiting the free movement of water in their interiors. If living things keep water controlled, then the implication, say many researchers, is obvious. Life probably formed on land, where water was only intermittently present.
Land start. Some of the key evidence in favour of this idea emerged in 2009, when Sutherland announced that he and his team had successfully made two of the four nucleotides that comprise RNA3. They started with phosphate and four simple carbon-based chemicals, including a cyanide salt called cyanamide. The chemicals were dissolved in water throughout, but they were highly concentrated, and crucial steps required UV radiation. Such reactions could not take place deep in an ocean — only in a small pool or stream exposed to sunlight, where chemicals could be concentrated, he says. Sutherland’s team has since shown that the same starter chemicals, if they are treated subtly differently, can also produce precursors to proteins and lipids. In the past year (Xu et al 2020), his team has produced the building blocks of DNA — something previously thought implausible — using energy from sunlight and some of the same chemicals at high concentrations. ast year, they showed that amino acids spontaneously linked up to form protein-like chains if they were dried out6. And those kinds of reaction were more likely to occur with the 20 amino acids found in proteins today, compared with other amino acids. That means intermittent drying could help to explain why life uses only those amino acids, out of hundreds of possibilities. “We saw selection for today’s amino acids,”. In a 2008 study, Deamer and his team mixed nucleotides and lipids with water, then put them through wet–dry cycles. When the lipids formed layers, the nucleotides linked up into RNA-like chains — a reaction that would not happen in water unaided. But simply making RNA and other molecules is not life. A self-sustaining, dynamic system has to form. Frenkel-Pinter suggests that water’s destructiveness could have helped to drive that. Just as prey animals evolved to run faster or secrete toxins to survive predators, the first biological molecules might have evolved to cope with water’s chemical attacks — and even to harness its reactivity for good. water acted as a selection pressure: only those combinations of molecules that could survive in water would continue, because the others would be destroyed. Where might all this have happened? On this point, there is a generational divide in the field. Many senior researchers are committed to one scenario or another, whereas younger researchers often argue that the question is wide open. The open ocean is unviable, says Frenkel-Pinter, because there is no way for chemicals to become concentrated. An alternative marine idea has been championed since the 1980s by geologist Michael Russell, an independent researcher formerly at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Russell argues that life began in vents on the seabed, where warm alkaline water seeps up from geological formations below. Interactions between warm water and rocks would provide chemical energy that would first drive simple metabolic cycles, which would later start making and using chemicals such as RNA Russell is critical of Sutherland’s approach. “He’s doing all these fantastic bits of chemistry,” he says, but for Russell, none of it is relevant. That’s because modern organisms use completely different chemical processes to make substances such as RNA. He argues that these processes must have arisen first, not the substances themselves. Meanwhile, many researchers have expressed scepticism about Russell’s alkaline-vent hypothesis, arguing that it lacks experimental support. By contrast, chemical experiments that simulate surface conditions have made the building blocks of nucleic acids, proteins and lipids. “None of that synthesis exists in that deep-sea hydrothermal vent hypothesis. It just simply hasn’t been done, and possibly because it can’t be done,” says Catling. Narrowing down the location where life started will require understanding of the broader picture of prebiotic chemistry: how the many reactions fit together, and the ranges of conditions under which they occur. That mammoth task has been attempted by a group led by chemist Sara Szymkuć, president of the start-up firm Allchemy in Highland, Indiana. The team published a comprehensive study in September that used a computer algorithm to explore how a vast network of known prebiotic reactions could have produced many of the biological molecules used in life today17. The network was highly redundant, so key biological compounds could still form even if multiple reactions were blocked. For this reason, Szymkuć argues that it is too early to rule out any of the scenarios for where life originated. That will require systematically testing a range of different environments, to see which reactions occur where. 
- [If we used the Sun as a Gravitational Lens, This is what a planet at Proxima Centauri would look like](https://www.universetoday.com/149214/if-we-used-the-sun-as-a-gravitational-lens-telescope-this-is-what-a-planet-at-proxima-centauri-would-look-like/) - Universe Today (2020)
> In a recent study, two theoretical physicists argue that the Sun could be used in the same way to create a Solar Gravitational Lens (SGL). This powerful telescope, they argue, would provide enough light amplification to allow for Direct Imaging studies of nearby exoplanets.
“To directly observe and image an exoplanet we need access to very large telescopes. Thus, if we want to see our own Earth in just one pixel from a distance of 100 light-years, we need a telescope with ~90 kilometers in diameter. 
 With an SGL, observations of nearby exoplanets (such as Proxima b and c or the seven rocky planets that orbit TRAPPIST-1) could be made by the middle of this century.
 This is what Earth would look like if it were the same distance as Proxima Centauri (4.24 light-years) and imaged by a telescope positioned 650 AU from the Sun (and using it as a lens). If you look closely, you can see cloud cover and the contrast between landmasses – in this case, the United States, Baja California, Mexico. Toth and Turyshev estimate that the total exposure time necessary for this amount of detail would be about one year.
 Of course, the team also identified several challenges that would need to be overcome first. Distance to the focal region is the most significant issue, which is located roughly 82.28 billion km (51 billion mi) from Earth. That’s about four times the distance between Earth and the Voyager 1 probe, which holds the record for being the farthest mission has ever traveled – 150 AU (22.44 billion km; 13.94 billion mi) as of 2020.
Second, they found that the lens would suffer from spherical aberrations and astigmatism that would need to be corrected for. Last, the Sun’s intense brightness would naturally overpower any light obtained from distant objects.
- [Image recovery with the solar gravitational lens](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2012.05477.pdf) - Toth et Turushyev (2021)
- [DIRECT MULTIPIXEL IMAGING AND SPECTROSCOPY OF AN EXOPLANET WITH A SOLAR GRAVITY LENS MISSION](https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2002/2002.11871.pdf) - Turyshev et al (2021) 
> A meter-class telescope with a coronagraph to block solar light, placed in the strong 
interference region of the solar gravitational lens (SGL), is capable of imaging an 
exoplanet at a distance of up to 30 parsecs with a few 10 km-scale resolution on its 
surface.
- [Thresholds in Origins of life scenarios](https://www.cell.com/iscience/pdf/S2589-0042(20)30953-6.pdf) - Jeancolas et al (2021)
> Thresholds are widespread in origin of life scenarios, from the emergence of
chirality, to the appearance of vesicles, of autocatalysis, all the way up to Darwinian
evolution. 
> the
most studied thresholds is Eigen’s ‘‘error threshold,’’ which constrains replication-based scenarios of early
genetic polymers
> A number of other prebiotic transi-
tions invoke thresholds explicitly or implicitly: for instance, the appearance of homochirality (Budin and
Szostak, 2010; Hawbaker and Blackmond, 2019), replication (Kauffman, 1986; Szathma ́ry, 2006), compart-
mentalization (Hargreaves et al., 1977), or Darwinian evolution
> The prebiotic synthesis of the building blocks of life (i.e., amino acids, nucleic acids, sugars, fatty acids) requires
reactants to reach sufficient concentrations for the reactions to take place, hence the existence of concentration
thresholds. Concentration thresholds can be overcome by acting on physical-chemical conditions resulting from
enclosure into vesicles (Luisi et al., 2014), wet-dry cycles (Nelson et al., 2001), freeze-thaw cycles (Monnard et al.,
2003; Trinks et al., 2005), adsorption on mineral surfaces (Lambert, 2008), or thermophoresis effects in hydrother-
mal vents (Baaske et al., 2007)
> The ‘‘progenote stage’’ has been described as a stage where genes heavily ex-
change between dividing protocells via horizontal gene transfer (HGT) (Woese and Fox, 1977). The transi-
tion from dominant HGT to lineages where genetic polymers and compartments are strongly correlated
has been coined the ‘‘Darwinian threshold’’ (Woese, 2002)
> In contrast, other authors posit the advent of Darwinian evolution before the appearance of proto-
cells
> So far, we have analyzed single threshold transitions. However, origin of life scenarios combine multiple transi-
tions (Szathma ́ry, 2015; Sole ́, 2016 ). There are to date only a few attempts to assemble complete detailed sce-
narios (Martin et al., 2003; Damer and Deamer, 2020).
> Such threshold articulations in origin of life scenarios also make sense in light of the concept of lifeness (also
referred to as aliveness or life index) proposed by several authors (Bruylants et al., 2010; Sutherland, 2017; Mala-
terre and Chartier, 2019). Lifeness stands for a scale where so-called infrabiological systems (Szathma ́ry, 2005) are 
positioned between a non-living state and a living state. It remains debated which quantities or measures best
account for lifeness. For instance, Bedau (2012) proposes a discrete scale from 0 to 9 depending on the number
of interactions between three subsystems: container, metabolism, and program, whereas Malaterre and Chartier
(2019) propose a multidimensional gradual scale that integrates system and environment-related functions. 
- [Reductionism vs. emergence: Are you “nothing but” your atoms?](https://bigthink.com/13-8/reductionism-vs-emergence-science-philosophy) - Adam Frank (2021)
- [Mon mémoire en 400 mots : Frédéric Genest](http://www.exoplanetes.umontreal.ca/mon-memoire-en-400-mots-frederic-genest/) - Irex
- [Chemistry of the universe](https://chandra.si.edu/chemistry/?fbclid=IwAR2qhlmGbZMgfQjTLm-NnzdG1bxofKi_sgxtC2WXqwq2GH_df2e6NgN_ZGI) - Chandra
- [Memmler's The Human Body in Health and Disease, Enhanced Edition](https://books.google.fr/books?id=wZ7qDwAAQBAJ&pg=PA22&lpg=PA22&dq=body+chemical+composition+carbon+18.5&source=bl&ots=IiW60Sf25T&sig=ACfU3U1LCpxibClVOXJHglShZ1vkySeUHA&hl=fr&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjr0MPDz5HxAhVDZhQKHRCYA0cQ6AEwEXoECAgQAw#v=onepage&q=body%20chemical%20composition%20carbon%2018.5&f=false) 
- [Knowledge Encyclopedia Human Body!](https://books.google.fr/books?id=z86pDwAAQBAJ&pg=PA8&lpg=PA8&dq=body+chemical+composition+carbon+18.5&source=bl&ots=j7PfV384ui&sig=ACfU3U2z1pChcpW2_uc0WGwd6KfloZWp_A&hl=fr&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjr0MPDz5HxAhVDZhQKHRCYA0cQ6AEwEnoECAcQAw#v=onepage&q=body%20chemical%20composition%20carbon%2018.5&f=false)
- [Life on Earth is hard to spot](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/2053019620918939) - Lenton et al (2020)
> * The triumph of the Gaia hypothesis was to spot the extraordinary influence of Life on the Earth. ‘Life’ (with a capital L) is the clade of all living beings stemming from the last universal common ancestor, as distinct from ‘life’ the class of properties common to all living beings. ‘Gaia’ is Life plus its effects on habitability. Life’s influence on the Earth was hard to spot for several reasons: biologists missed it because they focused on life not Life; climatologists missed it because Life is hard to see in the Earth’s energy balance; Earth system scientists opted instead for abiotic or human-centred approaches to the Earth system; Scientists in general were repelled by teleological arguments that Life acts to maintain habitable conditions. Instead, we reason from organisms’ metabolisms outwards, showing how Life’s coupling to its environment has led to profound effects on Earth’s habitability.  we highlight the paradox that Life is hard to spot in the Earth’s energy balance, yet in terms of information and order (negative entropy) it is everywhere and radically changing things. the fourth and scientifically most challenging aspect of Gaia; that a global scale entity was invoked exhibiting goal-directed behaviour – self-regulation of habitable conditions. This seemingly required an engineer or designer where none exists. Such teleological reasoning immediately repelled many scientists (although some began to research feedbacks involving life). For biologists, it was compounded by the absence of a workable evolutionary mechanism to account for it. But as we review, theoretical progress is showing that there is an effective filtering mechanism whereby stabilising feedback regimes tend to persist, increasing the chance of acquiring further stabilising mechanisms. This can explain how Life has become involved in the regulation of habitable conditions – that is, how Gaia has come about. Such a filtering mechanism necessarily involves making errors – and current human activities, which are globally destabilising, appear to be a case in point. Thus, the occurrence of the Anthropocene does not disprove the existence of Gaia. 
> * While biologists study organisms, populations, species and so on, until very recently they had never considered the long-lived entity Life as a phenomenon to be studied. While the environment of living things includes other organisms as well as abiotic aspects, Life’s environment is purely abiotic because Life includes all living things.
> * the Gaia hypothesis proposed that Life would not have survived without affecting its own habitability conditions. 
> * Alongside failing to spot Life and Gaia, evolutionary biologists misread and misunderstood the idea of ‘regulation’ or ‘homeostasis’ in Gaia as something akin to a common good. In their vocabulary, it was seen as something increasing the fitness of all individual living beings – which ought to be explained by altruism – that is, behaviours which are costly (in fitness) for the individuals performing them but beneficial for the collective 
> * Life is powered by only a tiny fraction of the total absorbed solar energy. Yet, in terms of negative entropy and information, Life is everywhere and radically changing things. With that tiny fraction of available energy, Life has profoundly altered atmospheric composition and hence the Earth’s longwave energy fluxes and has significantly changed planetary albedo and hence the Earth’s shortwave energy fluxes, thus exerting considerable leverage on the overall energy balance. This agency must come from the informational quality of Life. Thus, the energetic and entropic views of Life are very different.
> * Photosynthetic organisms manage to convert on average only ∼0.5 W m–2 or ∼0.3% of the ∼180 W m–2 solar radiation incident on the Earth’s surface into the chemical energy of sugars in gross primary production. This total free energy input of ∼264 TW (Dyke et al., 2011) is the power supply for Life. Around half of it is respired by the photosynthesising organisms, and the other half providing net primary production (food supply) to the rest of Life. This power supply is tiny compared to the radiative energy balance of the planet (which absorbs ∼120,000 and ∼80,000 TW at the surface) and modest compared to the ∼900 TW power supply available from atmospheric circulation alone (Dyke et al., 2011). However, it is considerably larger than the surface power supply from Earth’s internal heat source 
> * vegetation generally lowers land surface albedo, particularly in the boreal high latitudes (Betts, 2000), although grasslands can increase albedo relative to bare soil. Phytoplankton also generally lower ocean surface albedo
> * Life on land increases evapotranspiration, cooling the surface and affecting cloud cover.
> * We now know that Life has increased both atmospheric and cloud albedo through the production of aerosols and cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) that scatter solar radiation
> * The largest effects of Life on the Earth’s energy balance come via altering atmospheric composition and hence longwave fluxes. The atmosphere absorbs ∼360 W m–2 of the ∼400 W m–2 radiated by Earth’s surface and re-radiates ∼330 W m–2 back to the surface – a phenomenon commonly termed the ‘greenhouse effect’. Life has had a major impact on the ‘greenhouse effect’ by altering atmospheric composition
> * The recognition and definition of Gaia stemmed from two different sources. The first one, emphasised by Lovelock, was the detection of life on other planets. Thinking about this issue, Lovelock (1965) came to recognise, and then strongly emphasise (Lovelock, 1972), that Life’s imprint on the Earth is visible in the constitution of the atmosphere, maintained in chemical disequilibrium by living beings’ metabolism producing oxygen and methane (and other reduced gases). The second source of reflection for Lovelock stemmed from his daily activities as a consultant both for major scientific institutions of the Earth sciences (such as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) or the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR)) and for chemical and petroleum industries. Armed with his Electron Capture Detector, Lovelock crossed the oceans and atmosphere and found chemical entities produced by living beings, for example, dimethyl sulphide (DMS; Lovelock et al., 1972), and by human activities, for example, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs; Lovelock et al., 1973).
> * Thinking about Life viewed from space, on the one hand, and tracing the delicate chemical connections between Life (including humans) and its environment, on the other hand, led to the recognition of a new entity and to the tracing of its boundaries, redefining our conceptions of Life and the environment. If living beings produce aspects of their environment, then their material boundaries no longer stop at their membranes and epidermis, and they expand as far as their influence on the environment can reach. Thus, what was beforehand thought of as ‘abiotic’ such as the atmosphere can now be seen as a living part ‘like the fur of a mink or the shell of a snail’ (Lovelock, 1972).
> * Lovelock originally noted the profound impact of Life on the balance of gases in Earth’s atmosphere, creating an extraordinary state of thermodynamic disequilibrium
> * Oxygen at ∼21% of today’s atmosphere is almost entirely a biological product (of oxygenic photosynthesis by cyanobacteria, algae and plants), which would have a surface concentration of only ∼10−12 atm in the absence of Life
> * The concentration of methane in this oxygen-rich atmosphere is a factor of ∼1030 greater than expected at equilibrium, as are the concentrations of hydrogen and ammonia 
> * This extraordinary order (negative entropy) in atmospheric composition can only be explained by an input of free energy via photosynthetic Life. An estimated ∼0.7 TW is required just to maintain the O2–CH4 coexistence
> * Carbon dioxide (CO2) is extraordinarily scarce in the Earth’s atmosphere when compared to Mars and Venus (which have atmospheres dominated by CO2; Lovelock, 1972). Current human activities notwithstanding, Life has turned CO2 from a dominant component of the atmosphere to a trace gas, by locking up organic carbon in sedimentary rocks and by accelerating the weathering of continental silicate rocks and the resultant deposition of carbonate sediments. In the absence of Life, atmospheric CO2 would be up to ∼10- to 100-fold higher 
> * Recent work suggests that Life has also lowered atmospheric pressure by transferring nitrogen (the largest constituent of the atmosphere) to the crust, by fixing atmospheric N2 and sequestering some of the resulting organic nitrogen in sedimentary rocks (Johnson and Goldblatt, 2018). This weakens the greenhouse effect by reducing the ‘pressure broadening’ of longwave absorption lines of other gases, an effect which outweighs the reduced Rayleigh scattering of solar radiation by N2
> * Other biogenic gases generate aerosols and sometimes CCN, principally affecting Earth’s shortwave radiation balance. Biogenic DMS (Lovelock et al., 1972) produced by a range of marine phytoplankton oxidises to form biogenic CCN, an increased density of which increases the albedo of marine stratocumulus. Nearshore macro-algae also produce a range of aerosol and CCN precursors, including methyl iodide (Lovelock, 1975a). Vegetation emits large amounts of isoprene, terpenes and other biogenic volatile organic carbon compounds (BVOCs) that can also be a source of aerosols and CCN
> * Living organisms are made out of a range of elements in stoichiometric proportions that contrast sometimes significantly from their natural abundance at Earth’s surface. Importantly, the inputs of those essential elements in bio-available form to the Earth’s surface are generally meagre compared to the total requirements of Life. Thus, for Life to flourish, it must increase the inputs and/or (re)cycle the essential elements it needs 
> * Carbon is the backbone of organic chemistry and photosynthetic and respiratory fluxes of carbon exceed inputs to the surface Earth from the mantle and the tectonic recycling of sedimentary rocks by a global ‘cycling ratio’ of around 400. Carbon input to the surface from tectonic recycling of sediments is also increased somewhat by Life, because the sedimentary organic carbon reservoir is entirely due to Life and its oxidation depends on a biogenic oxygen-rich atmosphere
> * Nitrogen has an essentially biological cycle in which organisms are responsible for all the key transformations. The input of bio-available nitrogen (NO−3 and NH+4) has been increased by a factor of ∼40 by biotic nitrogen fixation (prior to human activities) relative to the small abiotic source from lightning strikes (Fowler et al., 2013). Nitrogen uptake in net primary production is ∼100-fold larger still, indicating a global nitrogen cycling ratio of ∼100.
> * Phosphorus has no significant gaseous form and all ultimately derives from continental chemical weathering. Phosphorus weathering is amplified by Life, by an uncertain factor, through innovations including organic acid production and selective dissolution of P-rich apatite inclusions in rocks. Also, around 20% of the P weathering flux derives from sedimentary rocks whose deposition depended on Life (Lenton et al., 2018b). Phosphorus uptake in net primary production exceeds weathering by a global cycling ratio of ∼1250, higher than nitrogen or carbon, consistent with phosphorus being the ‘ultimate limiting nutrient’.
> * Sulphur is widely used by Life in varying (and remarkably poorly known) proportions (Linzon et al., 1979; Matrai and Keller, 1994). Life amplifies sulphur input by a factor of ∼30 in that inputs of sulphur are dominated by sediment recycling (Lenton et al., 2018b) rather than mantle input (Kagoshima et al., 2015) and the two major forms of sedimentary sulphur are both attributable to Life: pyrite is a biogenic product and gypsum required biogenic oxygen to produce the sulphate it contains. Sulphur uptake in net primary production further exceeds sulphur input by a global cycling ratio of ∼10–40.
> * Some elements are not biologically required; hence, there is no incentive for Life to alter their cycling. However, cycling may happen as an accidental consequence of chemical incorporation into biological products, or the chemical consequences of a biological product. A famous example of the latter is the natural nuclear fission reactors from Oklo in Gabon dating to ∼1.7 Ga, which required the prior rise of atmospheric oxygen in the Great Oxidation to concentrate fissionable 235U  (Gauthier-Lafaye et al., 1996).
> * A large fraction of the diversity of Earth’s minerals are either biologically precipitated or require oxygen (a biological product) in their creation and hence would not exist without Life (Hazen et al., 2008). More fundamentally, it has been proposed that Life has altered the planet’s rock cycle and played a role in continent formation. Life clearly has the energetic potential to do so – its current power supply (264 TW) exceeds the power driving mantle convection (∼12 TW) by a factor >20 and that driving crust cycling (26 TW) by a factor of ∼10 
> * Whether Earth would have lost its water in the absence of Life, making the planet uninhabitable, is an open question. In the absence of Life, without biotic enhancement of weathering and possibly without continents, atmospheric CO2 and temperature would be much higher, risking passing the runaway threshold to a ‘moist greenhouse’ atmosphere that supports higher rates of hydrogen loss to space
> * Furthermore, by producing an oxygen-rich atmosphere, an ozone layer, and the strong thermal stratification of the stratosphere, Life has created an effective ‘cold trap’ at the tropopause that prevents water reaching the upper atmosphere where it can be split apart and hydrogen lost to space. That said, before causing the rise of atmospheric oxygen, early methanogens likely enhanced hydrogen loss to space by increasing atmospheric methane concentration
> * To render Gaia visible, an important counterfactual – or what-if – question has been asked: how would Earth look had Life had not influenced its environment?
> * The habitability discussion has focused on climate, after Lovelock and Margulis (1974) proposed that the long-term stability of climate in spite of the Sun’s rising luminosity (the ‘faint young Sun paradox’) may be explained by Life’s influence on the climate. More concrete mechanisms were suggested after the proposal of an abiotic climate regulator (Walker et al., 1981) in the form of a negative feedback involving silicate weathering and the associated uptake of CO2 that can buffer variations in planetary surface temperature and thus maintain liquid water over a wider range of solar luminosity than in the absence of the feedback. This abiotic feedback can broaden the habitable zone bounded by 0°C at which runaway freezing occurs and ∼70°C (rather than the boiling point of 100°C) at which a ‘moist greenhouse’ occurs (the oceans evaporate to create a pressure-cooker atmosphere).
> * The crucial difference with Life becoming intertwined in feedback loops is that it brings, by definition, habitability constraints (as well as biotic effects) into those feedbacks loops: Life affects environmental variables, just like other abiotic processes; but Life is sensitive to what it does within habitable conditions, whereas abiotic processes are not. This can make negative feedback stronger (a more effective regulator) than in the abiotic case. For example, Life strongly amplifies the silicate weathering feedback on Earth today (Lovelock and Watson, 1982; Lovelock and Whitfield, 1982) and by having organisms such as plants with narrower habitability bounds than 0°C–70°C entwined in the feedback loop, gives rise to narrower stabilising ranges. Furthermore, the biogenic weathering effect with plants may now be so strong (Schwartzman and Volk, 1989) that it could be maintaining Earth in a habitable state for plants, when without them it would by now have become (or could soon become) uninhabitably hot for them (Lenton and von Bloh, 2001). This is supported by recent modelling capturing the interacting effects of water vapour, CO2 and N2, which suggests the ‘habitable zone’ would be disappearing in the absence of Life, which has broadened it considerably (Goldblatt, 2016).
> * Alongside the habitability issue, Gaia scientists looked for examples where the activity of certain living beings (certain parts of Life) regulate an environmental variable and thus produce and maintain their own (and sometimes others’) condition of existence at a regional or global scale.2
> * Climate, at various timescales, has again been an important focus of study. For example, the famous Charlson–Lovelock–Andreae–Warren (CLAW) hypothesis highlighted the possibility for climate regulation via biogenic DMS production (Charlson et al., 1987). This drew widespread attention from climatologists, biogeochemists and Earth system scientists. Another important example is the large-scale effects of land plants on the hydrological cycle: for instance, the increase of precipitation enabled by the evapotranspiration of the Amazon rainforest is necessary for the rainforest to persist (Betts, 1999). More generally, evapotranspiration by plants increases the latent heat flux over land up to threefold relative to a desert world (Kleidon et al., 2000). The resulting cooling effect is generally strongest in the tropics, where it outweighs the effect of vegetation lowering surface albedo (Betts, 1999). On longer timescales, it has also been argued that planktonic calcifying organisms, by buffering carbonate-ion concentration in the oceans and thus stabilising the carbon cycle, may have prevented the return of catastrophic ‘snowball Earth’ events during the Phanerozoic (Ridgwell et al., 2003).
> * The regulation of chemical components has also been scrutinised, such as the long-term regulation of atmospheric oxygen, constrained within bounds not too high to allow sustained vegetation and not too low to enable multicellular animal life using respiration.
> * Now we turn to the final – and most often quoted – reason why many scientists rejected Gaia: Lovelock’s invocation of goal functions and the apparent purposiveness that comes with that. This was initially compounded by a lack of theoretical mechanisms that could provide an explanation of how ‘global adaptation’ – especially a predominance of regulation – could come about. 
> * At the very moment Lovelock discovered Gaia, he attributed it functions, goals and norms. Lovelock was looking for the ‘role’ of the various influences of Life on the environment: What is the function of methanogens within Gaia? Of the Amazonian rainforest? Lovelock introduced the ideas of feedback, self-regulation, homeostasis and goal-seeking behaviour from cybernetics. Functional talk has not generally hurt engineers or scientists trained in cybernetics: it is very common in systems analysis. But Lovelock, even though appealing to this cybernetic tradition, meant something more when he talked about the ‘function’ of living parts of Gaia. He was also using a biological meaning of function. Lovelock attributed function to Gaian parts just as we do spontaneously with any other living forms when we speak about (for example) the function of organs within a body. In this context, attributing a function to an entity is normative: when we say that it is the function of the heart to pump blood, we mean that the heart is supposed to pump blood. This triggered Dawkins’ (1982) principal objection to Gaia: functional talk is only scientifically sound when it applies to entities subject to natural selection – and in his view, being a population of one with little sign of reproduction, Gaia was not subject to natural selection.
> * The teleological critique was linked to a theoretical one: biologists argued that a mechanism producing global regulation was lacking. Such a mechanism would need to do the same explanatory work as natural selection does in explaining the adaptation of organisms and legitimising functional talk in biology. But they could not see what such a mechanism be, if natural selection cannot operate on Gaia because Gaia is not part of a population and does not reproduce (Dawkins, 1982). Instead one or two, such as W. D. Hamilton, realised there might be something somewhat akin to natural selection (Lenton, 2005) – that is, a filtering of variation in which regulatory variants came to persist and therefore predominate (as opposed to members of a population that leave the most descendants coming to predominate).
> * Over in ESS, there was never this recognition of the need for an ‘evolutionary’ mechanism to explain Gaia. Instead critics of the Gaia hypothesis within ESS put forward examples of ‘destabilisation’ by Life (Kirchner, 1989; Tyrrell, 2013), for example, oxygenic photosynthesis introduced a poison for most of the biosphere at the time; the spread of oxygenic photosynthesis has initiated glaciations, possibly including ‘Snowball Earth’ events (Kopp et al., 2005); and disruption of the biological sulphur cycle may have been responsible for the largest Phanerozoic extinction (Ward, 2009). 
> * As Lovelock was well aware from the start, presenting cases of destabilisation as a refutation of Gaia misses a basic understanding both of biology and of cybernetics. In biology, just because we can suffer cancer does not mean we are not self-regulating organisms (Doolittle, 2019). In cybernetics, any ‘hat function’ (e.g. inverted parabola) response of Life to an environmental variable coupled with an effect of Life on that variable can give rise to both positive feedback and negative feedback regimes. Lovelock enshrined this in the formulation of the Daisyworld model (Watson and Lovelock, 1983) and has subsequently emphasised, for example, that the DMS feedback can be positive or negative depending on the circumstances (Lovelock and Kump, 1994). Lovelock’s second book ‘The Ages of Gaia’ (Lovelock, 1988) hinges on this recognition – intervals where destabilisation predominates mark the boundaries between the ‘Ages’ in which regulation predominates.
> * After biologists had abandoned the stage, and Earth system scientists had largely declined to enter it, a small band took up the challenge of theorising about GaiaThe Daisyworld model (or ‘parable’) was formulated to demonstrate an abstract mechanism by which living entities, could, in principle regulate the global environment without any teleology or inconsistency with natural selection (Watson and Lovelock, 1983). This model rapidly became the centre of theoretical discussion about Gaia
> * Recognising that critics of Gaia may have presumed too narrow a definition of how evolution can occur – requiring variation within populations and replication with heritability – two independent arguments have been made for cruder filtering mechanism not requiring reproduction: the idea of ‘sequential selection’ (Betts and Lenton, 2007; Lenton et al., 2018a), and that of ‘selection by survival alone’ that is, based on persistence through time alone – which marked the return of Doolittle (2014), hinging on Bouchard (2014). In the sequential selection mechanism, the central idea is that through a series of trials/experiments over time, Life’s effects on its environment could have stumbled upon stable attractors, which by definition then tend to persist. Selection based on persistence alone (Doolittle, 2014) then gives the opportunity for the resulting Gaia phenomenon to acquire further persistence-enhancing (stabilising) mechanisms. Subsequently, Doolittle has offered either biogeochemical cycles (Doolittle, 2017) or clades including Life (Doolittle, 2019) as relevant units of selection based on differential persistence – noting that both form populations of a sort.
> * Gaia has been famously criticised by biologists and by Earth system scientists. Biologists pointed out the lack of theoretical mechanisms for regulation, tied in with a critique of Lovelock’s teleological language when he took too seriously the idea that Gaia is alive. Empirical examples of global regulation were of little interest to them, and having missed the novelty of the entities Life and Gaia, they were perhaps too prompt to dismiss the theoretical issues as unsolvable. By contrast, Earth system scientists, having granted that living beings are part of the Earth system, largely missed the theoretical and philosophical challenges raised by the centrality of Life in Gaia. In so doing, they largely restricted themselves to empirical discussions about how the Earth system actually works. If they deployed theoretical efforts at all – of the kind at stake in Daisyworld, that is, playing with toy models to explore the possible space of behaviours – these efforts, even though influenced in some way by Gaian research, were tied to the understanding of the Earth system humans inhabit and to consequences of this understanding for future global changes
> * The response to these critiques has generally been: (1) to repent from teleological language and (2) to point to one important success of Gaia with the constitution of ESS. This article has taken these two arguments backwards: (1) the teleological dimension of Gaia must be confronted directly, rather than being avoided to please biologists; (2) ESS, though influenced by Gaia in many ways, has lost sight of the central position of Life.
> * Life massively alters its global environment. So much so that it becomes hard to separate Life’s boundaries from its environment, hence the name given to the complicated entity which results from these interactions: Gaia. Studying the physiological and ecological behaviour of this entity has been the central Gaia research programme: could Life maintain its own condition of existence? What are the general properties and behaviour of a global entity constituted by the interaction of Life and its environment?
- [Properties of galaxies reproduced by a hydrodynamic simulation](https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.1418) - Vogelsberger et al (2014)
- [Observing the big bounce with tensor modes in the cosmic microwave background: Phenomenology and fundamental loop quantum cosmology parameters](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010PhRvD..82l3520G/abstract) - Grain et al (2010)
> Cosmological models where the standard big bang is replaced by a bounce have been studied
for decades. The situation has, however, dramatically changed in the past years for two reasons:
first, because new ways to probe the early Universe have emerged, in particular, thanks to the
cosmic microwave background, and second, because some well grounded theories – especially loop
quantum cosmology – unambiguously predict a bounce, at least for homogeneous models
Solving the singularity by replacing the
big bang by a big bounce is one of the main achieve-
ment of loop quantum cosmology (LQC) [1] as a symme-
try reduced version of the loop quantum gravity (LQG)
scheme to nonperturbatively quantize general relativity
in a background invariant way [2].
Moreover, if the Universe is assumed to be filled with a
scalar field described by a self-interaction potential well,
the contracting phase – preceding the Big Bounce – can
set the field in the appropriate conditions for a phase of
slow-roll inflation to start just after the bounce. In the
specific (and simple) case of a massive scalar field, and
in the framework of an effective LQC universe, only a
tiny amount of potential energy at the bounce is neces-
sary for a long enough phase of inflation to be naturally
generated [3–5]. In effective LQC, it is therefore possi-
ble both to solve the big bang singularity and to gener-
ate the specific conditions necessary for inflation to take
place. Finally, and this is the keypoint addressed by this
paper, such a model can, in principle, be tested. The
quantum fluctuations leading to the cosmological pertur-
bations observed in the cosmic microwave background
(CMB) anisotropies, though still stretched to astronomi-
cal size by inflation, experienced the influence of the con-
traction phase and of the bounce. As a consequence, the
statistical properties of cosmological perturbations are
potentially distorted as compared to the standard infla-
tionary prediction. This finally translates into distortions
in the angular power spectra of CMB anisotropies.
- [The inhabitance paradox: how habitability and inhabitancy are inseparable](https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.00950) - Goldblatt (2016)
> The  dominant  paradigm  in  assigning  “habitability”  toterrestrial planets is to define a circumstellar habitablezone:  the locus of orbital radii in which the planet isneither too hot nor too cold for life as we know it.  Onedimensional climate models have identified theoreticallyimpressive boundaries for this zone:  a runaway green-house or water loss at the inner edge (Venus), and low-latitude glaciation followed by formation ofCO2cloudsat the outer edge
> sing the same class ofclimate model, I show that the different climate statescan overlap very substantially and that “snowball Earth”,moist temperate climate, hot moist climate and a post-runaway dry climate can all be stable under the samesolar flux.   The radial extent of the temperate climateband is very narrow for pure water atmospheres, but canbe widened with di-nitrogen and carbon dioxide.   Thewidth of the habitable zone is thus determined by the at-mospheric inventories of these gases. Yet Earth teachesus  that  these  abundances  are  very  heavily  influenced(perhaps even controlled) by biology.  This is paradox-ical:   the  habitable  zone  seeks  to  define  the  region  aplanet should be capable of harbouring life; yet whetherthe planet is inhabited will determine whether the cli-mate may be habitable at any given distance from thestar. This matters, because future life detection missionsmay use habitable zone boundaries in mission design

