# Faits insolites sur l'univers

- [Il y a des virus qui attaquent des virus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sputnik_virophage)
- [Il pourrait exister des lunes de lunes](https://www.sciencesetavenir.fr/espace/moonmoons-des-lunes-de-lune-pourraient-exister_128530)
- [Il y a autant d’écart temporel entre Chauvet et Lascaux qu’entre Lascaux et nous, c'est-à-dire 18 000 ans](https://www.franceculture.fr/emissions/carbone-14-le-magazine-de-larcheologie/la-grotte-chauvet?utm_medium=Social&utm_source=Twitter#Echobox=1600750122)
- [Mercure est en moyenne la planète la plus proche de toutes les planètes du système solaire](https://www.popularmechanics.com/space/solar-system/a26839314/closest-planet-to-earth-on-average/)
- [Les platypus sont biofluorescents](https://www.degruyter.com/view/journals/mamm/ahead-of-print/article-10.1515-mammalia-2020-0027/article-10.1515-mammalia-2020-0027.xml)

# Les fails de l'exploration spatiale 

- On November 11, 1982, an over-the-air software update was broadcast to the Viking 1 lander to correct a battery charging issue. The update had an error in it and accidentally overwrote the wrong bits resulting in a bricked lander. Basically, they accidentally overwrote the memory reserved for the antenna pointing code which immediately terminated all communications.  Une erreur humaine durant la mise à jour du logiciel de Viking 1 rend l'antenne de communication HS, et met fin à la mission. I always get nervous updating firmware, but I can't imagine what it would be like to be responsible for ending a billion-dollar mission ($4 billion in 2014 dollars)
- Mars 3 est une sonde spatiale soviétique lancée le 28 mai 1971. L'atterrisseur de Mars 3 est le premier engin de fabrication humaine à avoir réussi à se poser en douceur sur Mars.  Mais vingt secondes seulement après avoir déployé ses instruments, il est victime d'une panne lui donnant juste le temps de transmettre une image sombre et floue de la planète, et l'empêchant ainsi de fournir des informations scientifiques
- Le sismomètre embarqué à bord de Viking 1 reste inopérant car les opérateurs ne parviennent pas à débloquer le verrou qui protège sa partie mobile des vibrations durant le vol : ce sismomètre sera le seul instrument non opérationnel de tout le programme Viking. Le sismomètre de Viking 2 peut être activé mais les scientifiques constatent rapidement que les données collectées n'ont rien à voir avec des mouvements sismiques. Solidaire du pont de l'atterrisseur, l'instrument enregistre tous les mouvements mécaniques affectant celui-ci : rotation de l'antenne grand gain orientable, déplacement du bras robotique, fonctionnement du magnétophone et surtout action du vent qui fait vibrer la plateforme. 
- Venera 11  ET 12 ?? (Vénus) :  Les caméras embarquées n'ont pas fonctionné à la suite d'une erreur de conception qui n'a pas permis d'éjecter les obturateurs placés sur les objectifs. Le système d'analyse de la composition du sol a également été victime d'une panne. 
-  Mariner 1, which was launched amidst great fanfare, experienced multiple failures of its guidance system and was intentionally destroyed just 300 seconds after launch. To this day, it remains unclear exactly what caused the problem for Mariner 1, but most accounts suggest that a minute error in its computer code led to the failure. In fact, noted science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke once quipped that Mariner 1 “was wrecked by the most expensive hyphen in history.” 
- Sometimes the biggest of disasters can come from the smallest of mistakes. Never mind the want of a nail, what about a simple screw up between Imperial and Metric?  In 1998, the Mars Climate Orbiter left Earth for the Red Planet aboard a Delta II rocket. Designed to study the martian atmosphere and serve as a communications relay station for other missions, the orbiter had an uneventful launch and journey. But when the probe reached Mars, it began its planned orbital insertion maneuver, went silent, and was never heard from again. An in-depth analysis of Mars Climate Orbiter’s data showed impulse figures that were supposed to be reported to the computer in newton-seconds were actually reported in pound-force seconds, essentially rendering them gibberish. The Mars Climate Orbiter acted on this erroneous information, entered an orbit that was too low, and either burned up in the atmosphere or skipped off it into space. The cost of the mission was $327 million. But at least that expensive lesson taught NASA to better check its units. It turned out that NASA was using metric units to measure the thrust needed to put the orbiter on the right trajectory, but the main contractor Lockheed Martin was using English units in the ground-based computer used to make the calculations. Lockheed calculated the thrust in pound-seconds, but NASA interpreted these as Newton-seconds, so the orbiter came in too low and burned up. 
- L'oeil de Hubble when it was launched in 1990, it was regarded as the ultimate white elephant – not surprising given its project costs have gone from US$400 million to US$10 billion in the past quarter century. Within weeks of launching, images sent back by Hubble made it obvious that there was something seriously wrong with the telescope. The images were good, but not what was expected for the money spent. The telescope simply couldn't focus properly because the primary mirror had been ground to the wrong shape, which introduced spherical aberrations. Since the Hubble was already designed to be serviced by astronauts, NASA developed the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement (COSTAR), which was fitted by a Shuttle crew in January 1994.
- When NASA's Genesis mission to collect samples of the solar wind and return them to Earth returned home after three years in space, it seemed like a triumph. Launched on August 8, 2001, it had gone into deep space and used a remarkable aerogel collector to trap particles streaming out from the Sun like flies in amber. At the end of the collection phase, the sampler was folded and sealed into a return capsule, which was set on an intercept course with Earth. On September 8, 2004, the capsule entered the atmosphere over Oregon at a speed of 11 km/s (24,700 mph). Protected by its heat shield, it slowed down to supersonic speed and a parachute deployed to slow it down more. Then, before it touched down, a helicopter snared the capsule in midair and flew off to the recovery base. At least, that was the idea. What really happened was that a faulty deceleration sensor failed to trigger the drogue parachute deployment. Still traveling in free fall at 311 km/h (193 mph), the capsule pranged into the floor of the Dugway Proving Ground in Utah so hard that the capsule cracked open and part of the sample chamber was breached. At first, it seemed like a total loss, but luckily the soft ground cushioned the impact so the capsule didn't disintegrate, and careful recovery work managed to save some of the samples despite the contamination caused by the crash.  But the one thing that truly makes Genesis stand out was the chutzpah displayed by one NASA spokesman on the day of the incident, who said that the mission was a complete success … right up until the crash.
-  Beagle 2. This grassroots little Mars Lander That Could of a mission had a sort of come-from-behind spirit to it that defied failure. Named after the famous ship, HMS Beagle, that carried Charles Darwin around the world in the 1830s, it was the brainchild of Professor Colin Pillinger of Britain's Open University and was developed along with the University of Leicester. The first British interplanetary probe, it was designed to look for signs of present or past life on Mars. In the end, the project managed to raise £44 million (US$80 million) from the private sector and £22 million (US$40 million) from the British government – lunch money compared to other Mars missions. With this, they managed to build a 33.2 kg (73 lb) clam shell spacecraft designed to land either way up on Mars, then deploy a set of four circular solar panels, an arm with a camera, a rock sampler, a spectroscope, and a tethered "mole" rover that would burrow a few feet from the spacecraft before being winched back. On June 2, 2003, Beagle 2 lifted off attached to ESA's Mars Express orbiter. Six days before the orbiter reached Mars, it was released to proceed on its own and entered the Martian atmosphere on a ballistic trajectory at 20,000 km/h (10,800 mph) on December 25. It was never heard from again. For the next twelve years, the world wondered what had happened. After overcoming so many obstacles and beating so many odds, how could Beagle 2 simply vanish? There were questions raised in the British House of Commons, official inquiries were made, and many theories were put forth as to what happened. Meanwhile, Beagle 2's father, Pillinger, passed away in 2014. Then in January of 2015, NASA disclosed that its Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter had spotted the little lander. On high resolution imagery, it showed up on the Martian sands like a cloverleaf, proving it had survived the landing and hadn't crashed as feared. But what happened? Why didn't it radio home? The exact details are still unclear, but one likely scenario is based on how Beagle landed. Though the probe was protected by heat shields and slowed down by parachutes, its actual landing was achieved while encased in airbags to cushion the impact. NASA's experience with similar airbag landings show that spacecraft bounce much more than expected on Mars. It's possible that Beagle landed harder than planned and either bounced back into its parachute or continued to bounce as its airbags deflated, so it became tangled. When it opened, the images show that it could only deploy two of its four solar panels, and the airbag deflated on top of it, so it couldn't charge. In other words, when it came time to wake up, Beagle 2 got trapped in the bedding. 
- Les premières images des premiers pas sur la Lune étaient dégueulasses
- Schiaparelli s'écrase sur Mars suite à un défaut de programmation qui le fait se séparer de son parachute pendant la descente. Il fait un gros cratère sur Mars


The United States has launched 29 missions to Mars, six of which were failures. But that’s still a pretty good track record. For comparison, the USSR launched 20 missions to Mars before its demise, and 17 of them either partially or completely failed.

https://techbebop.com/post/bricking-a-mars-probe/
https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venera_11#Les_%C3%A9quipements_scientifiques_de_l'atterrisseur 
https://astronomy.com/news/2020/12/nasas-failures-robotic-space-missions-that-didnt-go-as-planned
https://newatlas.com/space-failures-mishaps/46050/  
https://www.laserfiche.com/ecmblog/whats-worst-software-bug-history/ 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xsqe3utT6rs 

# Expériences insolites de l'histoire de l'exploration spatiale

- [These Are 7 of The Strangest Experiments Humans Have Ever Done in Space](https://www.sciencealert.com/wild-space-experiments-conducted-by-humans) - Science Alert

- Galiléo : la Terre est-elle habitée ?
- TARDIS : des tardigrades dans l'espace
- Chang-E : des vers à soie sur la Lune
- Une combinaison spatiale transformée en satellite : A spacesuit floats, untethered, away from the International Space Station ISS), the vast black void of space yawning before it. You may be relieved to learn that no humans were harmed in the making of this experiment - there's no one in the Russian Orlan spacesuit, nicknamed Ivan Ivanovitch or Mr Smith - it's stuffed with a bunch of old clothes and a radio transmitter. The idea was that old spacesuits could be used as satellites. SuitSat-1 - officially designated AMSAT-OSCAR 54 - was deployed on 3 February 2006, but the experiment was only partially successful; reports vary, with NASA claiming the transmitter had died shortly after release and Russia reporting a final transmission a whole fortnight later. The last confirmed signal was received on 18 February. SuitSat-1 went on to spend several months in silent orbit, before entering Earth's atmosphere and burning up on 7 September 2006.
- L'expérience de Galilée sur la Lune : In the late 16th century, Galileo Galilei dropped two spheres of unequal mass from the Leaning Tower of Pisa in Italy. When both arrived on the ground at the same time, he'd countered classically established views, by showing mass had no bearing on gravitational acceleration. All objects, no matter the mass, should fall at the same rate - even if it's a feather and a hammer. On Earth, this is tricky to demonstrate due to air resistance. But nearly 400 years later, a human standing on the Moon repeated the experiment. On 2 August 1971, Commander David Scott of Apollo 15 took a geological hammer in one hand, and a falcon feather in the other. He raised them to a height of about 1.6 metres off the ground, and dropped them. Because the astronaut was essentially in a vacuum, without air resistance the two objects fell in sync. "Within the accuracy of the simultaneous release, the objects were observed to undergo the same acceleration and strike the lunar surface simultaneously," wrote NASA astronaut Joe Allen, "which was a result predicted by well-established theory, but a result nonetheless reassuring considering both the number of viewers that witnessed the experiment and the fact that the homeward journey was based critically on the validity of the particular theory being tested." The hammer and feather are both still up there.
- Des tortues autour de la Lune : Back in the 1960s, before humans had been to the Moon, it wasn't clear exactly how - if at all - getting up close and personal with the Moon would affect us physically. So, in 1968, the Soviet space program sent two Russian tortoises (Agrionemys horsfieldii) up for a trip round Earth's companion. Actually, it wasn't just tortoises. Included in the flight were wine flies, mealworms, seeds, plants, algae and bacteria. There was also a dummy fitted with radiation sensors, since none of the living organisms aboard were remotely analogous to humans. Tortoises, according to a 1969 report, seem to have been chosen because they're relatively easy to strap down. The two unnamed reptilian cosmonauts were placed onboard the Zond-5 spacecraft on 2 September 1968, at which point they were no longer fed. They were launched into space on 15 September 1968, returning back to Earth (in the Indian ocean) on 21 September. They finally returned to Moscow on 7 October. Their journey included seven days of spaceflight, several days in tropical climates (including bobbing about in the ocean while they waited for retrieval) and transportation back to Russia. Ultimately, they spent 39 days without food. It would try anyone. Control tortoises that remained on Earth were also deprived of food for the same time period. A comparison of the two sets of tortoises revealed that any changes in the space-faring reptiles were mostly the result of starvation, with a small contribution from spaceflight-related atrophy. We'd like to say that no one ever sent tortoises to space again, but sadly, two more tortoise missions took place. Zond 7 in 1969 carried tortoises. In 1975, the Soyuz 20 spacecraft ferried a tortoise around for 90 days. And two tortoises flew on the Salyut-5 space station in 1976.
- Des araignées en impesanteur : In 2011, scientists set about answering the burning question: Can spiders adapt to space travel? They sent two golden silk orb-weaver spiders (Trichonephila clavipes), Esmeralda and Gladys, for a 45-day sojourn aboard the ISS. They were kept in a nice habitat (can you imagine spiders loose on a space station), with light conditions to simulate a night-day cycle, temperature and humidity control, and a healthy diet of juicy fruit flies. Both spiders adapted beautifully, continuing to spin their webs and hunt their food. Orb weavers eat their webs at the end of each day to regain protein, and spin them again in the morning; this, too, the spiders continued to do right on schedule, which was interesting, since different orb weaver species on the ISS just spun their webs at any old time of day. But not everything was totally normal. In microgravity, the spiders spun their webs differently - flatter and rounder, compared to the more three-dimensional, asymmetrical structures the orb-weavers spin on Earth. The two spiders returned to Earth at the end of their stay in space. Esmeralda perished on the return journey, having lived a normal spider lifespan. Gladys returned home hale, but turned out to be a boy. He was renamed Gladstone.


- https://www.sciencealert.com/wild-space-experiments-conducted-by-humans

# Anecdotes de l'histoire des sciences

- Le doigt de Galilée
- Full Newton Alchemist
- Le nez de Tycho Brahé
- Les restes de Clyde Tombaugh
- La première image de la surface de Mars a été coloriée.

- Le point NEMO, cimetière d'épaves spatiales

## Le cimetière de vaisseaux spatiaux

*Sources*

- ["Ci-gît la station Mir" : plongez dans le gigantesque cimetière spatial caché au fond de l'océan Pacifique](https://www.francetvinfo.fr/sciences/espace/ci-git-la-station-mir-plongez-dans-le-gigantesque-cimetiere-spatial-cache-au-fond-de-l-ocean-pacifique_2598566.html) - France Info
- [Le Point Nemo, cet étonnant cimetière de vaisseaux spatiaux au fond de l’océan Pacifique](https://www.maxisciences.com/espace/point-nemo-un-etonnant-cimetiere-de-vaisseaux-spatiaux-au-fond-de-l-ocean-pacifique_art43331.html) - Maxiscience
- [Le point Nemo, gigantesque « cimetière spatial » au milieu du Pacifique](https://www.lepoint.fr/astronomie/le-point-nemo-gigantesque-cimetiere-spatial-au-milieu-du-pacifique-02-04-2018-2207385_1925.php) - Le Point
- [Point Nemo](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Point_Nemo) - Wikipédia

---

- Voici l'endroit le plus isolé de toute la planète.
- Le point NEMO, comme on l'appelle, est situé au plein coeur de l'océan Pacifique.
- Les terres émergées les plus proches de cette zone se trouvent à plus de 2 000 km  de distance 
- Autour du point NEMO, on ne trouve pas d'habitations, pas de traffic maritime ou aérien et très peu de poissons. Par contre, on y trouve une très forte concentration... De vaisseaux spatiaux!
- Le point NEMO est en effet un véritable cimetière d'épaves spatial. C'est ici que les agences spatiales du monde entier envoient leurs débris spatiaux de grande taille ainsi que leurs satellites en fin de vie.
- L'idée étant de faire en sorte que ces débris de l'espace ne viennent pas se crasher sur dans une zone habitée, comme ce qui s'est passé au Texas 
- A ce jour, le point NEMO abrite plus de 260 engins en tous genres, qui reposent au fond de l'océan. 
- Le plus célèbre de ces trésors sous-marins est sans doute l'épave de la station MIR, qui s'y est crashée en 2001 à la fin de sa mission.
- Et c'est aussi ici que la station spatiale internationale doit finir ses jours

Peu de gens connaissent cet endroit très précis dans l'océan Pacifique. Et pourtant, de multiples vaisseaux spatiaux s'y sont échoués après leur voyage dans l'espace. Son nom : le "point Nemo".
uand un équipement spatial est en fin de vie et qu’il faut le faire redescendre sur Terre, la NASA a un endroit bien particulier pour les faire revenir.
Il s’agit de l’endroit le plus reculé de notre planète, situé dans l'océan Pacifique : le "point Nemo". Il n’y a pas de terres aux alentours avant 2.250 kilomètres de distance. Les astronautes à bord de la Station Spatiale Internationale (ISS) sont d’ailleurs les humains les plus proches de ce cimetière, vu que celle-ci orbite autour de la Terre à une distance de 360 kilomètres.
48°52.6 sud, 123°23.6 ouest. Les aventuriers qui suivraient ces coordonnées géographiques ne découvriraient pas un mystérieux trésor, mais un cimetière d'épaves... spatiales. 

L'objectif est de provoquer leur chute, de façon à ce qu'elle ne fasse ni dégâts, ni victimes.
Le "point Nemo", qui tire son nom du célèbre capitaine de Vingt mille lieues sous les mers, est apparu comme le plus adapté. Son avantage ? C'est le pôle d'inaccessibilité océanique de la Terre. Si ce terme semble presque sorti d'Harry Potter, il désigne simplement le point des océans le plus éloigné de toute terre émergée
pas d'île, pas d'habitant, presque pas de trafic maritime ou aérien.
Le "cimetière des objets spatiaux" n'abrite donc aucune épave intacte. Mais il accueille de plus en plus d'engins : plus de 260 ont été désorbités dans cette zone de 1 500 kilomètres carrés. L'agence spatiale russe y a remisé plus de 190 satellites, les Etats-Unis 52, l'Europe huit et le Japon six, selon le décompte de Popular Science (en anglais), en 2016.
Le "point Nemo" sera aussi le cimetière de la Station spatiale internationale (ISS). Il y a encore un peu de temps : sa mission doit s'achever au plus tôt en 2028. La date est régulièrement repoussée et les plans pour la rentrée contrôlée sont "revus régulièrement"
tombeau sous-marin
Entre 1971 et 2016, plus de 260 vaisseaux et satellites se sont écrasés sur le Point Nemo, parmi lesquels la station spatiale soviétique MIR, environ 140 véhicules russes et même une fusée Space X.
Cet endroit perdu au milieu du Pacifique, appelé « pôle d'inaccessibilité » ou point Nemo, en hommage au capitaine de Jules Verne, représente l'endroit le plus isolé du monde, distant de 2 688 kilomètres de la première terre émergée, l'île Ducie, un atoll inhabité. « C'est plutôt une zone qu'un point », explique Florent Deleflie, astronome de l'Observatoire de Paris.
Il est donc utilisé comme décharge, ou cimetière spatial pour employer un terme plus poli 
Le nom de « point Nemo » est également utilisé, notamment par la presse internationale pour désigner une vaste zone du Pacifique Sud, située au large des côtes chiliennes et utilisée comme vaste cimetière de matériel astronautique pour accueillir les restes de « vaisseaux spatiaux obsolètes encore contrôlables »
Les humains les plus proches du pôle maritime d'inaccessibilité sont régulièrement les occupants de la Station spatiale internationale4,5 ; celle-ci tourne en effet en orbite entre 330 et 410 km environ au-dessus de la surface du globe, alors que la première terre habitée est éloignée de 2 700 km environ. À la surface de la planète, certains navigateurs du Vendée Globe se rapprochent aussi du point Nemo
Ce point est également utilisé comme « décharge spatiale » en raison de son éloignement de tout lieu habité. Ce cimetière aurait déjà accueilli 250 à 300 engins spatiaux en fin de vie, dont la station spatiale soviétique Mir (120 tonnes), ainsi que les restes de la station spatiale chinoise Tiangong-17,8.


## Le 1er humain à quitter le système solaire

*Sources*

- [A man’s cremated ashes are heading to Pluto on a space probe, and it’s the longest known post-mortem flight](https://www.businessinsider.com/cremated-ashes-pluto-space-probe-2018-10?IR=T) - Business Insider
- [Today in science: Clyde Tombaugh discovers Pluto](https://earthsky.org/space/this-date-in-science-clyde-tombaugh-discoverer-of-pluto) - Earthsky
- [Tombaugh's discovery of Pluto revolutionized knowledge of our solar system](https://phys.org/news/2020-02-tombaugh-discovery-pluto-revolutionized-knowledge.html) - Physorg

---

New Horizons now travels to the mysterious Kuiper Belt or Third Zone before eventually leaving the Solar System altogether and taking Clyde Tombaugh's ashes with it
The man who discovered Pluto will become the first human to have his remains sent outside the Solar System after his ashes were placed on board the Nasa spacecraft New Horizons....
Tombaugh died in 1997 and his ashes were placed in an aluminum capsule within the space probe in 2006.
New Horizons came within 7,500 miles of Pluto in 2015 and is now more than four billion miles away from Earth
Tombaugh was the first person to ever get a glimpse of Pluto in 1930. When he was 24 years old, working at the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona, he discovered a planetary body that was then dubbed “Planet X.”
being “buried” in space isn’t unique. Since Star Trek creator did it in 1992, around 450 people have followed suit, requesting that a small portion of their cremated remains be launched into the great unknown. There are even companies dedicated to space burial, including Elysium and Celestis.
- February 18, 1930. On this date 90 years ago, a young astronomer was working at Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona. Clyde Tombaugh had just turned 25 years old. He’d been hired to continue a search for a ninth planet, begun by Percival Lowell. He’d been at it for about one year. On February 18, 1930, he compared photos of a single star field – taken six days apart a few weeks earlier – and noticed an object that was moving against the backdrop of distant stars. It was a small, dim, remote body in our own solar system. Today, we know this little world as Pluto.
- Tombaugh’s ashes were aboard the New Horizons spacecraft when it launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, in January 2006. Those ashes, carried in a small canister on the spacecraft, traveled with New Horizons on a 9-year, 3-billion-mile journey to Pluto, which it swept past in 2015, revealing a complex world with mountains and weather, and with a large, young, heart-shaped region of ice on its surface. 
- Tombaugh, born in 1906, grew up on a farm in Streator, Illinois. He’d dreamed of becoming an astronomer, but gave up the possibility of attending college after his family’s crops were destroyed by a hailstorm. However, he had taught himself mathematical skills required for astronomy, including geometry and trigonometry.

And he observed the skies with his homemade telescope.
Clyde Tombaugh using a device to ‘blink plates,’ that is, to click back and forth between two images of the same patch of sky, taken on two different nights.On those two images, the distant background stars would not appear to move, but closer objects would move from one night to another. Comparing thousands of images, Tombaugh discovered Pluto. 
Tombaugh's discovery was so much more than just the discovery of the ninth planet," said New Horizons Principal Investigator Alan Stern, of the Southwest Research Institute. "It was the harbinger of a whole new region of the solar system and two different and completely new types of bodies—dwarf planets and Kuiper Belt objects. 

Tombaugh died on January 17, 1997, in Las Cruces, New Mexico, at the age of 90, and he was cremated. A small portion of his ashes was placed aboard the New Horizons spacecraft. The container includes the inscription: "Interred herein are remains of American Clyde W. Tombaugh, discoverer of Pluto and the Solar System's 'third zone'. 

## Le stylo qui a sauvé Apollo 11

*Sources*

- [50 Years Later: The pen that saved Apollo 11](https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/50-years-pen-saved-apollo-11/story?id=64228723) - ABC News
- [When Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong Were Nearly Stranded on the Moon](https://www.history.com/news/buzz-aldrin-moon-landing-accident) - History Channel
- ["Stylo de l'espace" : cet instant où Buzz Aldrin est devenu le MacGyver de la Lune](https://www.lci.fr/sciences/video-50-anniversaire-apollo-xi-cet-instant-ou-buzz-aldrin-est-devenu-le-macgyver-de-la-lune-space-pen-fischer-neil-armstrong-21-juillet-1969-nasa-2125499.html) - LCI
- [Space Pens Mark 45th Anniversary of First Moon Landing](https://www.space.com/26543-apollo-11-moon-landing-space-pens.html) - Space

---

- On July 20, 1969, the first men to land on the moon, Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin, had been on the moon’s surface collecting rock and dust samples for almost three hours.
As they were climbing back into the Lunar Module (LM) in preparation to return home, Aldrin hit the circuit breaker switch with the life support backpack on his suit.
-  the pen used to fix the broken switch and bring the Apollo 11 astronauts back to Earth is on display at The Museum of Flight in Seattle, Washington
-  This pen is equipped with a pressurized ink cartridge and can function in a weightless environment, underwater and in extreme temperatures—still used by astronauts today.
-  The switch (ENG ARM) activates the spacecraft’s ascent engine to lift them off the moon so they could rendezvous with Michael Collins, who was in the Columbia command module orbiting overhead.
-  Using what they had left, a pen, Aldrin activated the inside switch to engage the circuit breaker and trigger the engine.
-  Following the Apollo 11 historic July 20, 1969, moonwalk, Aldrin and Neil Armstrong were preparing to return to command from their lunar module when they discovered that a 1-inch engine arm circuit breaker switch had broken off the instrument panel.

In his book, Magnificent Desolation: The Long Journey Home from the Moon, Aldrin recalls spotting something on the floor of the lunar module that didn’t belong there.

“I looked closer and jolted a bit,” he writes. “There on the dust on the floor on the right side of the cabin, lay a circuit breaker switch that had broken off.” 
- Wondering where the switch had come from, he looked at the rows of breakers on the instrument panel. Then he “gulped hard.” 
- “The broken switch had snapped off from the engine-arm circuit breaker, the one vital breaker needed to send electrical power to the ascent engine that would lift Neil and me off the moon,” he writes. 
- “After examining it more closely, I thought that if I could find something in the LM to push into the circuit, it might hold,” Aldrin writes. “But since it was electrical, I decided not to put my finger in, or use anything that had metal on the end. I had a felt-tipped pen in the shoulder pocket of my suit that might do the job. 
- If the engine arm circuit breaker remained open, Armstrong and Aldrin likely would have been stuck
- Aldrin doit, quant à lui, se transformer en "MacGyver" - un rôle qu'il endosse bien avant la première apparition à l'écran de ce personnage de fiction, en 1985. Le bouton du commutateur qui sert à la mise à feu du moteur de remontée a en effet été brisé par l'un des deux hommes, probablement au moment où ils sont remontés à bord du module lunaire. Or, sans cette pièce, impossible de redécoller.
- Dans un coup de génie, Buzz s'empare alors de son stylo, le désormais fameux AG-7 ou "Space pen" (en français, "stylo de l'espace"), en extrait le capuchon et constate que le diamètre correspond à celui du poussoir. Aujourd'hui encore, Aldrin affirme qu'il possède le stylo original, ainsi que le morceau de l'interrupteur qui s'était rompu. Certains avancent cependant que même sans le bricolage effectué par Aldrin, le module lunaire d'Apollo XI aurait pu redécoller de la Lune. Buzz, connu pour son ego démesuré et sa haute opinion de lui-même, a-t-il construit sa propre légende, en forçant le trait ? Difficile à dire, d'autant qu'Armstrong n'a jamais démenti son équipier...
- Quoi qu'il en soit, grâce à Buzz Aldrin et au "Space pen", le 21 juillet à 17h54 (temps universel), soit vingt-et-une heures et vingt-six minutes après l'alunissage, le moteur du second étage de Eagle soulève le vaisseau et le propulse vers l'espace où l'attend le module de commande Columbia, en orbite à 110 kilomètres. Michael Collins, qui y est resté seul, retrouve enfin ses deux compagnons. 
- Armstrong maneuvered toward the open hatch, aided by Aldrin. As Armstrong twisted his bulky suit to head out, unheard in the vacuum of the cabin, something small snapped. Armstrong's backpack had broken off the ascent engine arming switch. But upon their preparation to leave the moon some 21 hours later, Armstrong calmly flipped the broken stub with a ballpoint pen. Another crisis averted, this time courtesy of the Fisher Space Pen. 
- Fisher's pen may not have saved the mission (the felt tip pens were provided by the Duro Pen Company) 
