# Le rôle des impacts de météorites dans l'origine de la vie

*Sources*

- [The Role of Meteorite Impacts in the Origin of Life](https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/ast.2019.2203) - Orinski et al (2010)
- Cours de Nadja Drabon : Meteorite impacts and their consequences for life - RED25

---

- "meteorite impacts can generate both subaerial and submarine hydrothermal vents, abundant hydrothermal–sedimentary settings, and impact analogues for volcanic pumice rafts and splash pools. Impact events can also deliver and/or generate many of the necessary chemical ingredients for life and catalytic substrates such as clays as well. The role that impact cratering plays in fracturing planetary crusts and its effects on deep subsurface habitats for life are also discussed."
- We conclude with the recommendation that impact craters should be considered prime sites in the search for evidence of past life on Mars
- When taken together with theoretical and observational constraints on planet formation, numerical simulations, and studied samples from our closest neighbor, the Moon, a clearer picture emerges of the first few hundred million years of Earth's history. While the details are debated, it is now widely accepted that a cataclysmic impact event at ∼4.5 Ga between the proto-Earth and a Mars-sized object (“Theia”) led to the formation of the Moon (e.g., Canup, 2012; Ćuk and Stewart, 2012). For several million years after this event the surface temperature of Earth would have remained well above the known upper temperature limit for life, rendering it inhospitable. Cratering rates over the subsequent few hundred million years are the topic of ongoing debate. Based originally on the determination of a large concentration of ∼3.9 Ga ages in Apollo samples (e.g., Papanastassiou and Wasserburg, 1971; Tera et al., 1974), the concept of the Late Heavy Bombardment (LHB) was proposed (see Chapman et al., 2007; Norman, 2009, and references therein). The scarcity of pre-3.9 Ga ages in Apollo samples as well as similar impact age distributions in some meteorites has led some to believe that the LHB was the result of a lunar terminal cataclysm (e.g., Cohen et al., 2000; Stöffler and Ryder, 2001; Kring and Cohen, 2002). Others have argued that this concentration of impact ages at ∼3.9 Ga is an artifact that reflects sampling biases (e.g., Hartmann, 2003; Zellner, 2017) or age resetting (Boehnke and Harrison, 2016), which resulted in a monotonic decay rate since ∼4.5 Ga. Regardless of whether or not there was a spike in cratering rates at ∼3.9 Ga, there is general consensus that, for the first half billion years of Solar System history, Earth experienced a higher rate of meteorite impacts relative to modern impact flux (cf. Chambers [2004] with Zellner [2017]), which further suggests that this prolonged bombardment continued to ∼3.4 Ga.
- Intriguingly, the ∼3.7–3.8 Ga Isua greenstone belt of Greenland, which temporally coincides with the end of this period of higher impact flux, has long been proposed to contain the earliest evidence for life, as indicated by the presence of highly negative δ13C values within carbonaceous inclusions found in apatite grains (Mojzsis et al., 1996). This coincidence, in part, led to the hypothesis of the impact frustration of life, whereby the intensity of impact cratering would have either precluded the existence of life prior to ∼3.8 Ga (Maher and Stevenson, 1988; Sleep et al., 1989) or extinguished its presence (Chyba, 1993), perhaps multiple times.
- Perhaps unsurprisingly, there has been a general tendency in the past few decades to think of impacts as primarily destructive events that would have endangered, rather than enabled, life on Early Earth, as most recently discussed in the work of Sleep (2018). This view was strengthened by the discovery of the ∼200 km diameter Chicxulub impact structure, Mexico, and its link to the mass extinction event that marks the end of the Cretaceous Period ∼66 million years ago (Schulte et al., 2010). However, if the carbon isotope ratios that were found preserved in metasedimentary rocks in Isua, Greenland (Ohtomo et al., 2014), and Labrador, Canada (Tashiro et al., 2017), are indeed evidence of life, then the origin of life would predate ∼3.8 to ∼3.9 Ga such that there would be sufficient evolution and accumulation of primitive organisms to leave an isotopically light carbon signature in the rock record. This is also supported by the recent discovery of putative fossilized microorganisms in rocks found in Quebec, Canada, hosted deposits interpreted as hydrothermal vent precipitates, and with a proposed age of >3.8 Ga and possibly as old at 4.2 Ga (Dodd et al., 2017). These findings beg the question: Why, or rather how, did life originate during such an inhospitable time in Earth's history—the Hadean—when impact rates were orders of magnitude higher than at the present day?
- we offer a solution that necessitates a paradigm shift in our view of the biological consequences of meteorite impact events on Earth and elsewhere in the Universe. We argue that impact events are not just isolated catastrophic geological events but a fundamental process in planetary evolution that plays an important role in the origin of life and in controlling planetary habitability.
- We review the beneficial effects for microbial life ranging from generating conditions conducive to the origin of life (e.g., clays that can act as catalytic substrates for organic reactions, serpentinization, atmospheric generation of hydrogen cyanide, and hot spring environments) to varied habitats for life that persist long after an impact event, including transient hydrothermal systems, endolithic habitats in impact glasses and impact shocked rocks, and impact crater lakes.
- On a planetary scale, numerical modelling has also shown that there is no plausible scenario in which the habitable zone could be fully sterilized during the period of intense cratering on early Earth (Abramov and Mojzsis, 2009; Grimm and Marchi, 2018). On the contrary, it is during the thermobaric phase that the first new habitats are created through fracturing, shock metamorphism, and melting
- At the end of thermobaric phases, the biosphere is significantly disrupted in the immediate area surrounding impact with local areas of sterilization. Subsequently, primary succession of the landscape will occur (Cockell and Lee, 2002). One of the significant outcomes of the thermobaric phase is the disruption of the local hydrosphere and/or cryosphere. Over the subsequent days to years, groundwater, if present, will flow into the newly formed hydraulic void represented by the crater structure. Coupled with precipitation and the melting of surface and subsurface ice deposits, where applicable, the influx of water into the crater depression can lead to the generation of a crater lake, potentially within days or weeks (Figs. 2, 5). Crater lakes in and of themselves represent important habitats
- It has become increasingly clear from studies of craters on Earth over the past couple of decades that interaction of fluids from crater lakes and other sources with hot impact-generated and impact-altered rocks can generate transient hydrothermal systems (e.g., Newsom, 1980; Naumov, 2005; Kirsimäe and Osinski, 2012; Osinski et al., 2013) that can persist for tens of thousands of years.
- The exact duration of impact-generated hydrothermal systems remains a topic of ongoing study and debate. Early studies of small to midsized craters, such as the 4 km diameter Kärdla and 23 km diameter Haughton structures, suggested that such systems would last thousands to tens of thousands of years (Jõeleht et al., 2005; Parnell et al., 2005). Cooling in these small to midsized structures is relatively rapid due to mainly convective heat transport (Kirsimäe and Osinski, 2012). However, recent high-precision age dating of the 23 km diameter Lappajärvi impact structure, Finland, suggests that post-impact cooling and hydrothermal circulation may have persisted for over 1 million years (Schmieder and Jourdan, 2013; Kenny et al., 2019). For larger craters, numerical modelling and age dating of the hydrothermal systems in the ∼250 km diameter Sudbury and ∼200 km diameter Chicxulub structures yield durations on the order of 1 to 2 million years (Ames et al., 1998; Abramov and Kring, 2004, 2007).
- these transient hydrothermal systems can provide the substrates (see Section 3) and habitats (see Section 4) necessary to support the origins and early evolution of life.
- After the cessation of hydrothermal activity, crater lakes may persist, albeit periodically, throughout geological time, providing relatively stable habitats that can persist for as long as the topographic expression of the crater is retained. On Earth today, lakes in craters such as Manicouagan and West and East Clearwater attest to the potential for these features to persist over hundreds of millions of years, although the biota that inhabit the lakes will experience turnover and change in diversity as climatic conditions within which the crater resides change over time.
- 
